George Orwell, whose name was Eric Blair, published 1984 in 1949 introducing the singularly dubious bad habit or Doublespeak, which is - obviously - embraced as virtue by all good citizens. Two features are central to the notion of Doublespeak: the capacity to assert that what is isn't (and vis versa) and also the reduction of the meaning    of words and ideas all together. It is to the later - and contemporarily slightly more popular - feature of this socially ingratiating blemish of personality.

Within the bounds of Doublespeak beauty, elegence, grace, awesomeness, greatness, and all other terms denoting virtues aesthetic, moral, and functional are simple called good. To communicate degree (because quantity is the new quality) one may say "plus good" or "double plus good". Now, no one actually speaks this way. We may conveniently tell ourselves that this quirk is merely an extavagance of distopian science-fiction. But, if we look more closely, we may see that something potentially more incidious is occuring. All positive terms are becoming interchangable. Some, of course, are more fashionable at one moment than others. In this way it matters less whether an experience inspires awe than it matters if 'awesome' is a term which your particuar social mileue endorses. Will referring to an experience as awesome help you to be in-grouped more than referring to it as 'salient', 'riveting', or 'captivating'. Our internal filters are conditioned now to censor for identity and potential offense rather than meaning and expression. By this process, we are becoming dumb, which means unable to speak - for those who have forgotten. By educating children within an environment saturated with this thinking we are retarding (and I'm not holding your hand on that one) their acquisition of abstractions and thus their capacity to critically think. 

Acquiring abstractions is necessary to see the world through the lense which has developed human society in both morally esteemable directions and malevelent ones. I would point out (with the hope that it will require no argument) that understanding each is important. Even the simplest of concepts which seem to a member of the civilized world to be parts of nature are actually abstractions. A chair is not a part of nature. Thinking that one type of form is for sitting on and another for resting objecs on is an abstraction which has to be learned. The loss of some abstractions may be benign. The loss of some is certainly dangerous. There are a few which I would like to make an argument to preserve

It is a surprise to most that 'ambivalent' and 'indifferent' actually have not only distinct but actually oppossing meanings. To be indifferent is to not have a preferrence. To be ambivalent is to be torn by conflicting and significant preferrences. I want to emphasize that my interest here is not to correct people and shame people for their lack of vocabulary - as though mere quantity of voacabulary were some virtue in its own right. This thinking would place breadth of vocabulary in a class of virtue also occupied by complete collections of original Beanie Babies and finding every skultula shell in Occarina of Time. And, while the latter is actually worth while, the virtue of an expansive vocabulary is actually quite distinct. This virtue is that you can think well, or better than you would otherwise be able to. The vocabulary itself, the ability to speak with a larger number of words, is not important. The words are short-hand for ideas. The ideas can be understood without the words. For instance, we have the more coloqial 'torn' which means the same thing as ambivalent. A person can know that they are torn, and therefore understand what ambivalence means, and it doesn't matter that they misuse and misunderstand the term ambivalent (until someone uses it correctly and they misunderstand, we'll get to that latter) as long as they have the concept their capacity for thought is not deminished.  

The virtue

Literal and Figurative


Myth


Standard


Theory




